Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's get started.
Welcome, everyone to lecture 11.
NOTE CONF
Uh, small crowd today.
Maybe Friday afternoon.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, um, today we're going to talk about vector semantics.
Um, this is really about words again.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this time we're going to talk about what the
words mean and how you could figure that out, and
NOTE CONF
not so much about what the words refer to.
Remember last time we talked about the problem of mapping
NOTE CONF
words onto objects?
So, for example, a child who has a new noun
NOTE CONF
doesn't know what the object, what the noun refers to.
But there's an object in the immediate context, and the
NOTE CONF
child is somehow able to figure out that, for example,
the noun refers to a new object that that they're
NOTE CONF
seeing for the first time, and we have discussed how
exactly that process works and what kind of assumptions we
NOTE CONF
need to make.
Particularly, we've talked about assumptions to do with biases or
NOTE CONF
priors.
So things that we know before the learning even starts,
NOTE CONF
maybe because they're innate or maybe because they're learned by
another process.
NOTE CONF
But we've said, well, if we combine these priors, these
biases, for example, the whole word bias, the taxonomic bias
NOTE CONF
or the mutual exclusivity assumption, then we actually make the
learning problem tractable, because if we don't have prior information
NOTE CONF
like this, then arbitrary mappings are possible and there's never
enough data to actually converge on the meaningful words.
NOTE CONF
And then in particular, we've looked at an example that
enables us to make that precise.
NOTE CONF
And that example is a model of number learning, learning
of number words that happens in children between 20 and
NOTE CONF
40 months, approximately.
And we've seen this model being formulated in Bayesian terms,
NOTE CONF
and the Bayesian approach is attractive here because it allows
us to combine prior knowledge in the form of a
NOTE CONF
prior distribution that is there before we've seen any data
with a distribution learned from the data, which is called
NOTE CONF
the likelihood distribution.
And let me just go back to that.
NOTE CONF
Sorry to that part of the lecture because we didn't
quite finish last time.
NOTE CONF
So this was the mathematical formulation of that model.
And what we're dealing with is a set of input
NOTE CONF
pairs that pair words with sets.
So for example the word three with three cookies.
NOTE CONF
And now the idea is you test the hypothesis.
You figure out what kind of mapping procedure you have,
NOTE CONF
a procedure that maps Cookies or objects in general.
Sets of objects onto number words.
NOTE CONF
And here we've talked about a model that assumes these
mappings to be just little programs, which are written here
NOTE CONF
in Lisp notation.
And these programs correspond to children knowing to count to
NOTE CONF
one, to 2 to 3.
And then eventually they will hopefully acquire.
NOTE CONF
At around 40 months they'll acquire the the facility of
counting up to an arbitrary number.
NOTE CONF
And this is sometimes called CP the cardinal principle.
And so what we're doing here is we are computing
NOTE CONF
the probability of H which is a hypothesis.
So these are our hypotheses these programs given some data.
NOTE CONF
And then this can be written as p of h.
Given w and s w and s are the words
NOTE CONF
in the set here.
And this according to Bayes law is proportional to the
NOTE CONF
be inverse.
Conditional p of w given s and h times p
NOTE CONF
of h, which is the probability of the hypothesis.
The prior probability.
NOTE CONF
And so the output is.
Basically we, uh, we output the posterior here with the
NOTE CONF
highest probability.
And that will correspond to one of these programs or
NOTE CONF
lower levels.
Know how to count to one, to 2 to 3
NOTE CONF
and so on or knows the cardinality principle.
Then the likelihood term we've defined as either one over
NOTE CONF
n, where n is the length of the number sequence
if the program returns undefined, and for example, this one,
NOTE CONF
sorry, this one returns one if it's a set of
size one and undefined otherwise this one returns 1 or
NOTE CONF
2 or undefined, and so on.
Or if we are able to generate the correct number
NOTE CONF
word with this hypothesis h of s s is the
set, W is the word.
NOTE CONF
Then we output this with a probability alpha, where alpha
is a parameter typically chosen to be close to one,
NOTE CONF
let's say 0.7 or 0.9.
And this is the probability of guessing correctly, because if
NOTE CONF
we don't output undefined and we don't output the correct
word, then we guess right.
NOTE CONF
The child has a number line.
Maybe they can count to ten, but they can only
NOTE CONF
map objects up to five.
Set size five.
NOTE CONF
So for all the other sets they need to guess.
And of course they randomly pick a number and it
NOTE CONF
might be correct by chance.
And this is what this model's here one minus alpha
NOTE CONF
times one over n.
And then the next ingredient that we need is of
NOTE CONF
course the prior here this h.
So where does this come from.
NOTE CONF
So the authors here They work in this probabilistic programming
framework, right.
NOTE CONF
With these little Lisp programs.
And so they assume that a prior is defined in
NOTE CONF
terms of two dimensions, the first of which is what
they call a rational rules prior, where they count the
NOTE CONF
primitives that are present in the program.
So these are functions essentially.
NOTE CONF
And of course simpler is better.
Remember we've seen this for example in the context of
NOTE CONF
the minimum description length principle where we said that simpler
lexicons simpler codes are better.
NOTE CONF
So this is a related assumption.
It's not exactly the same but it's related.
NOTE CONF
And so they assume a set of primitives here, like
checking whether it's a singleton set or a set of
NOTE CONF
two set of three functions like set different logical functions
counting.
NOTE CONF
To do with the number line, the counting routine one
two, three, four go to the next or the previous
NOTE CONF
one.
Incidentally, children find it quite easy to go to the
NOTE CONF
next number, but they find it hard to go back
to the previous number.
NOTE CONF
So, for example, here we could assume that previous of
W is harder and more costly than the next of
NOTE CONF
W.
And of course recursion, right?
NOTE CONF
Recursion is if you then apply the function to itself
and they assume that first of all, recursion is costly.
NOTE CONF
This is because recursion is required to acquire the cardinality
principle, right?
NOTE CONF
They assume this is implemented using recursion.
And as we said, there is a story behind this
NOTE CONF
that has to do with the fact that recursion is
used in other parts of acquisition, for example grammar acquisition.
NOTE CONF
So they assume recursion is available, but it's not so
easy to acquire it.
NOTE CONF
So we attach a cost gamma.
And then PRR of H is the the cost of
NOTE CONF
all the other primitives in a given hypothesis.
So, for example, um, this hypothesis would be pretty cheap.
NOTE CONF
It really just includes one function here the single function.
This would be more, uh, costly or less probable because
NOTE CONF
it has multiple functions here, and this one is a
relatively short one.
NOTE CONF
It has a singleton.
The next difference, it has about four different, uh, primitives,
NOTE CONF
but in particular it has recursion.
So that means it would be, uh, more costly than,
NOTE CONF
than the other uh hypotheses.
However by how much is a parameter this gamma here.
NOTE CONF
And in the paper they experiment with different values of
gamma.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is, this is our prior then.
And so that means we can now compute the posterior
NOTE CONF
down here.
Uh, we need a bit more information.
NOTE CONF
So they also take into account the probabilities for the
individual number words because, as we said, the environment and
NOTE CONF
the data that you're exposed to also obviously has an
effect on your learning.
NOTE CONF
And so this is from a corpus of child directed
speech where they've basically counted, counted how often a different
NOTE CONF
number of words occur.
And they take that into account.
NOTE CONF
And then they can they can train their model and
test it on data.
NOTE CONF
So the data comes in the form of something like
this, right?
NOTE CONF
Where for a given language we know at what age,
uh, children know how to count to one, to 2
NOTE CONF
to 3, or when they acquire the cardinality principle, which
is in purple here, and the sequence is the same
NOTE CONF
across languages, the exact timing can vary.
Um, and so they get this, uh, this curve out
NOTE CONF
of the model where we have the different hypotheses here.
1234 Noah and then cardinality principle, and then a few
NOTE CONF
other hypotheses that they throw in just to make the
task more realistic.
NOTE CONF
And then here is the probability on the y axis.
So and on the x axis is the amount of
NOTE CONF
data.
So more and more data is available.
NOTE CONF
More and more examples are available to the child or
to the model in this case.
NOTE CONF
And initially the one Noah is very probable and then
reduces in probability.
NOTE CONF
Then the two Noah.
The three Noah.
NOTE CONF
And finally at this point here the cardinality principle becomes
the most probable.
NOTE CONF
And also then the model converges and more training will
not make any more difference okay.
NOTE CONF
And then they they in the paper if you look
at the paper they vary the gamma and the alpha
NOTE CONF
parameter.
They vary the amount and the type of data.
NOTE CONF
They vary the hypothesis space.
So they experiment quite a lot with this model.
NOTE CONF
But it is able to produce this pattern, which is
quite close to what we see in the in the
NOTE CONF
child data.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that was sort of finishing up from last time.
And now for something completely different.
NOTE CONF
Well, not completely good for something different.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've seen word learning and I've just talked about
biases.
NOTE CONF
Things like the whole object the whole object bias or
mutual exclusivity or for example in the in the word
NOTE CONF
learning the the the learning model.
We've seen a bias towards shorter hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that is is another type of bias.
NOTE CONF
And this is then combined with the data.
And we've talked about fast mapping where children on a
NOTE CONF
single utterance Map a word into an object.
And we've seen that there's some evidence for this, but
NOTE CONF
there's also evidence that it's not actually the whole story
because it's very fleeting.
NOTE CONF
The children might be able to to name the word
the object correctly, but then they forget the name quite
NOTE CONF
quickly.
So something like the Bayesian inference model that we've seen
NOTE CONF
a moment ago might be more plausible.
And so if we take a step back now, then
NOTE CONF
we've talked about various components of word learning.
We've talked about word segmentation where you take the speech
NOTE CONF
stream coming in and you chop it up into words
because the speech stream for the child doesn't have any
NOTE CONF
pauses or any, uh, any segments.
So you need to infer those.
NOTE CONF
Once you've done this, maybe you're able to infer reference.
So you're mapping words and objects or numbers, number words
NOTE CONF
and set sizes as we've just seen.
So that's one aspect of word learning.
NOTE CONF
But of course, not all the words refer to objects,
right?
NOTE CONF
For a word like dog or table.
You can reasonably argue that its meaning is really whatever
NOTE CONF
object it can refer to.
But what about what about words that are, for example,
NOTE CONF
abstract or words that are not nouns, verbs, prepositions, articles,
and so on.
NOTE CONF
How do we learn those?
And again we'll talk about context.
NOTE CONF
The number learning model is essentially about context right.
You have you have heard this word in the context
NOTE CONF
of a set of a certain size.
And that's how the child learns.
NOTE CONF
But we are going to generalise, generalise this notion of
learning a meaning representation from context.
NOTE CONF
And if I don't run out of time again, we'll
also talk about some experiments that show that these representations
NOTE CONF
perhaps are cognitively plausible.
And neural networks are back in today's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But let's start with the short quiz.
NOTE CONF
And this is basically to give you an intuition of
what we mean by context.
NOTE CONF
So take a moment to scan the QR code.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is about learning a word from context or
NOTE CONF
guessing the meaning of a word from context.
Just like the child will have to guess that you're
NOTE CONF
referring to this dog, or that you're referring to these
five cookies in the right context.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So and this is philosophers have been worrying about this
NOTE CONF
for at least a hundred years.
So Wittgenstein has a quote.
NOTE CONF
The meaning of a word is its use in the
language, which is really just a way of saying that
NOTE CONF
you should rely on context.
So I have a bunch of words here in uppercase,
NOTE CONF
and I have sentences that they occur in.
And maybe you are familiar with this with these words,
NOTE CONF
in which case it's easy.
But I've tried really hard to find rare words.
NOTE CONF
And so if you could match them to the right
synonyms.
NOTE CONF
So she filled the samovar.
I bought the beer below.
NOTE CONF
He mastered the crisis with a remarkable, remarkable sangfroid.
In the nest there was a sower.
NOTE CONF
They go to the pub to drink and enjoy the
crack.
NOTE CONF
Can you figure out what the word means and associate
the correct translation or the synonym?
NOTE CONF
For.
That.
NOTE CONF
So these are all real words.
I didn't make them up.
NOTE CONF
So.
I want.
NOTE CONF
To know.
What are.
NOTE CONF
You going.
To say.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's wait until we have 50 responses.
Sure.
NOTE CONF
More.
Okay, let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so crack is, uh, a word that means something
like atmosphere.
NOTE CONF
Things like chat and, uh, being convivial.
Uh, I think it's Irish.
NOTE CONF
Samovar is a type of kettle.
This is, again, a lone word.
NOTE CONF
Russian song for self-possession.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
Sarah is a hawk.
And below is a type of trinket.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so you all got this right?
Maybe it was too easy.
NOTE CONF
Um, but let's assume these were words that you had
never seen before.
NOTE CONF
You still would have been able to figure them out
from the context and that.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
So this was the, uh, the answer.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that is the idea.
So this is the, uh, the key idea that you
NOTE CONF
need to hold on to throughout the whole lecture today.
Right?
NOTE CONF
That we're not going to define the meaning of a
word, or try to work it out in any sort
NOTE CONF
of logical or semantic way.
We're just going to for each word, we're just going
NOTE CONF
to look what other words it occurs with, right.
So we're figuring out the meaning by looking at the
NOTE CONF
context of a word.
And we'll see two approaches where this idea can be
NOTE CONF
made computationally precise.
And it's an idea that has been extremely successful in
NOTE CONF
AI over the last 15 years a bit last 12
years, let's say.
NOTE CONF
And that is in all the LMS that you're all
using.
NOTE CONF
But it is an idea that initially comes from cognitive
science as well.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look.
At this.
NOTE CONF
Okay so we've talked about reference.
But what about abstract nouns?
NOTE CONF
Verbs?
Adjectives function words like every but from they.
NOTE CONF
The approach we'll see works for all of them.
Not just for nouns, not just for concrete things.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is the the type of example we've
just seen.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So if you don't know what some of our means,
NOTE CONF
you can figure it out from the context.
And this is also an everyday experience, right.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes you will encounter words that you haven't heard before,
but you can often figure it out by the way
NOTE CONF
these words are used without actually having to look them
up or see a definition.
NOTE CONF
So we will talk about representations for these for the
meaning of these words.
NOTE CONF
And these are called word vectors or sometimes called word
embeddings.
NOTE CONF
And as I said these are also heavily used in
in language models.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at a let's look at an example.
So here's a bunch of text.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't actually matter that much what the text is.
The field anthropologists must gain understanding and start with the
NOTE CONF
explanations and commentaries, blah blah blah, some sort of scientific
text.
NOTE CONF
And now let's assume we want to figure out the
meaning of certain words in this text.
NOTE CONF
Let's focus on those three here.
Learn this.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
First learn.
NOTE CONF
Discover.
And here's another instance of first.
NOTE CONF
So how can we make this idea more precise?
This idea that the meaning should be the context of
NOTE CONF
the word, or should be represented as the context of
the world?
NOTE CONF
Well, first of all, let's define context.
So here what I've done for each of these words.
NOTE CONF
First learn discover in red I've given a context, and
the context is simply the previous three words and the
NOTE CONF
next three words for each of them.
And I'm ignoring punctuation marks.
NOTE CONF
So sentence boundaries for example, don't matter.
So this is one way of defining context, just the
NOTE CONF
immediate, sometimes called a window, a context window before and
after the word that we're interested in.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is the same text with the same windows.
NOTE CONF
And now we can tabulate right.
We can take our words first learn discover.
NOTE CONF
These are the three words we're interested in.
And then for each of the context words.
NOTE CONF
So here these is the context of first here's another
occurrence.
NOTE CONF
Meaning doesn't actually occur in this context.
But here we we just write down all the words
NOTE CONF
that occur in these contexts.
And then we just count.
NOTE CONF
So these occurs twice in the context of first come
across twice as well.
NOTE CONF
Learn the context.
Meaning occurs once two occurs once discover meaning occurs once
NOTE CONF
two occurs once, calm occurs once, and so on.
So we get a table like this, where we count
NOTE CONF
for each word how often other words occur in their
context.
NOTE CONF
And this is the same table just introducing some terminology.
So these words here are called target words.
NOTE CONF
These are the words for which we're trying to figure
out the meaning.
NOTE CONF
And these words here are the context words.
So these are the words that occur around the target
NOTE CONF
in our window right here.
We've just assumed A33 word window on either side.
NOTE CONF
And then these numbers here they're called context vectors.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You can you can think of them as a vector.
So this is the vector for discover.
NOTE CONF
This is the vector for learn and so on.
And of course in reality you have a lot more
NOTE CONF
context words.
And you have a lot more counts in these vectors
NOTE CONF
okay.
And so we can construct these context vectors very simply.
NOTE CONF
We can.
First of all, we need to decide what our target
NOTE CONF
words are, the words that we would like to compute
the meaning for.
NOTE CONF
Then we need to figure out the context window.
Right here we just said three words before three words
NOTE CONF
after in our text.
Uh, and then we just count how often we get
NOTE CONF
all the occurrences of the target words.
Right?
NOTE CONF
All occurrences are first learned discover.
And then for each of them, we count how often
NOTE CONF
the other words, the context words occur in the context
window.
NOTE CONF
And that's really it.
And the idea is just to do this for lots
NOTE CONF
of text.
And then we will get uh, vectors here with, uh,
NOTE CONF
lots of context words.
Do you normally start by saying I will have a
NOTE CONF
vocabulary of, I don't know, 10,000 words.
And then you essentially get a matrix 10,000 by 10,000,
NOTE CONF
right?
With 10,000 target words and 10,000 context words.
NOTE CONF
They don't have to be the same.
But often people assume that the target word and the
NOTE CONF
set of target words and the set of context words
are the same.
NOTE CONF
And so with this little algorithm and a large amount
of text, we can turn a word into a vector.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What could this possibly be good for.
NOTE CONF
So that's what we're going to ask next.
So I'm turning words into vectors of numbers into rows
NOTE CONF
of numbers.
What can I do now.
NOTE CONF
What could this be useful for.
So here I have a number of suggestions right.
NOTE CONF
We can do arithmetic on the vectors.
Maybe compute distances between the vectors.
NOTE CONF
Maybe we can even compute vectors for sentences, not just
for words.
NOTE CONF
Maybe we can cluster them to find similar words.
Um, we can use these as input for other models.
NOTE CONF
Remember neural networks, they deal in vectors.
They don't understand any words.
NOTE CONF
They can only understand numbers.
So maybe that's that's something we can do.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe the other way around.
We can use neural networks to compute these vectors.
NOTE CONF
So if you could just select all of all of
these that you think apply.
NOTE CONF
All of them that are possible applications of these vectors.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
Know how much.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Now.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
Know.
What to do.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
30s.
Few more answers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's see.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Interesting.
NOTE CONF
So this was a trick question.
All of the answers are correct.
NOTE CONF
So these are all things we can do with the
vectors.
NOTE CONF
So we can do addition and subtraction.
And we'll actually see this later in the lecture.
NOTE CONF
We can compute distances to figure out how similar words
are.
NOTE CONF
We'll see that too.
We're not going to talk much about averaging but that's
NOTE CONF
also something we can do.
And that works surprisingly well.
NOTE CONF
You can basically figure out the meaning of a sentence
by averaging the word meanings.
NOTE CONF
We can cluster them.
Make sense that, for example cat and dog have similar
NOTE CONF
vectors.
So you should be able to cluster them and find
NOTE CONF
similar words and use them as input for neural networks.
And you can also compute them using neural networks.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see that in a moment.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this was um this is the first idea.
Once we have these vectors, we can compute similarity between
NOTE CONF
them.
So here and you might remember this.
NOTE CONF
You know a bit of linear algebra from high school.
It won't get very complicated, but let's assume we just
NOTE CONF
have a two dimensional vector.
Then we can represent this as a point in Euclidean
NOTE CONF
space.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So dog cat computer.
In reality of course these vectors will have hundreds, maybe
NOTE CONF
thousands of dimensions.
But here, just to be able to visualise it, we
NOTE CONF
just assume two dimensions and then we can compute the
distance.
NOTE CONF
So for example we see that dog and cat have
similar vectors.
NOTE CONF
So they're close together.
Cat and computer.
NOTE CONF
The vectors are more distant because the meanings are different.
And the red line here is the Euclidean distance.
NOTE CONF
The blue line here this is called Manhattan distance or
city block distance, which is the distance if you just
NOTE CONF
travel along the axes.
So it's a different way of measuring distance or again
NOTE CONF
a bit of linear algebra.
If you take these vectors here and then you draw
NOTE CONF
a line to the to the origin and you measure
the angle.
NOTE CONF
Take the cosine of the angle.
Then that's another way of measuring how similar to vectors
NOTE CONF
are.
So for example dog and cat would be similar.
NOTE CONF
Whereas cat and computer have a big angle so they're
less similar.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is literally what people do.
NOTE CONF
Oftentimes they use a cosine between two vectors to figure
out how similar these vectors are.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and here's just the definition of cosine, which is
the dot product of two vectors normalised by the product
NOTE CONF
of the length of x and y.
And this is the definition if you want to work
NOTE CONF
it out for each of the elements, or the Euclidean
distance is just the the geometric distance, you know, using
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Um, using Pythagoras essentially.
NOTE CONF
And this is the formula for that.
So these are just two distance measures.
NOTE CONF
There's a whole zoo of different distance measures.
Cosine is probably the most commonly used one.
NOTE CONF
But, um, you take your words, you transform it into
vectors, and then you have a very convenient way of
NOTE CONF
figuring out which, which words are similar, namely the ones
that have the same or similar, uh, vectors.
NOTE CONF
And you measure that by taking the cosine between the
two vectors, right?
NOTE CONF
The vectors close together are similar, and the ones that
are far apart are not.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and this can be used for all sorts of
things.
NOTE CONF
People have used it to learn syntactic categories, for example,
things like noun, verb and so on, because children need
NOTE CONF
to learn that as well.
Right.
NOTE CONF
If you think about it, they maybe learn the words
first, but then eventually they need to learn syntax as
NOTE CONF
well.
Um, for that you often set the context window to
NOTE CONF
be small.
Three words.
NOTE CONF
For example, if a in a larger window could be
a whole document or a paragraph, then you get more
NOTE CONF
meaning based vectors.
This count based approach that we've seen is sometimes referred
NOTE CONF
to as latent semantic analysis.
In the literature LSA, the problem is with the count
NOTE CONF
based approach that the vectors end up having lots of
zeros, right?
NOTE CONF
Let's assume you have 10,000 context words.
Then for any given target word, a lot of those
NOTE CONF
will be zero will never occur together.
And so you actually need dimensionality reduction which is a
NOTE CONF
way of making these vectors more compact, basically combining dimensions
that are similar.
NOTE CONF
We're not going to talk about this because this is
an outdated approach that people don't really use anymore, but
NOTE CONF
it's a good way of introducing the concept.
What people do use is ways of learning these vectors,
NOTE CONF
right, rather than just counting.
We'll now introduce a way where we can actually learn
NOTE CONF
these representations, and we can just use a neural network.
Initially, people just use very simple feedforward neural networks to
NOTE CONF
learn these representations.
And that worked surprisingly well and worked much better than
NOTE CONF
the the count based approach.
Okay, so counting versus learning, the traditional approach is you
NOTE CONF
count the word co-occurrence, right?
You have a big table.
NOTE CONF
And you have all the words in your vocabulary.
And you just count how often.
NOTE CONF
How often these occur together.
And so on.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So you get this Huge table.
NOTE CONF
And then each of these rows in the table is
a vector.
NOTE CONF
And that's really really straightforward.
You might want to compress the table a little bit.
NOTE CONF
And that works already surprisingly well.
But the learning approach works much better.
NOTE CONF
So what if we could learn these vectors here rather
than just counting?
NOTE CONF
And this is the idea between the idea behind these
word embeddings.
NOTE CONF
So word embeddings are just a particular kind of uh
context vectors.
NOTE CONF
And they're typically learned using a neural network.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you assume the input is a representation of the
context, and the output is the word that you want
NOTE CONF
to learn the meaning of.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And training data.
Again, just lots of text.
NOTE CONF
So you basically slide through your text with your contacts
window and, uh, the.
NOTE CONF
The word that we're trying to learn, which are called
w, and then you have context words before and after.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so.
You take these context words as an input, and you
NOTE CONF
predict the word that you want to learn.
And in between you have a neural network.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And what is the clever idea when you do this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Where the input is the context and the output is
NOTE CONF
the word that you're trying to learn.
Why is that good?
NOTE CONF
What do I not not need if I do this?
I don't actually need any training data.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because the Y here is of course in my text.
NOTE CONF
I know what this word is supposed to be.
So at training time I have this word.
NOTE CONF
But at a test time, I assume it's not there.
I predict the context word.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is sometimes called self-training and is again, this
NOTE CONF
is in a more complicated form is what makes LMS
work, right?
NOTE CONF
They're all pre-trained on billions of words to start with.
And this is using this self-training approach for which we
NOTE CONF
are just seeing a very, very simple version today.
But it's enough to to learn this word embeddings.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Self-training for neural networks.
Self-training is still supervised learning, right?
NOTE CONF
You still have a training signal, but you don't need
any annotation.
NOTE CONF
Nobody needs to tell you what the correct answer is.
The correct answer is already in your training data.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so how do we get the context vectors.
Let's look at the architecture.
NOTE CONF
So this is the architecture I have here just 90
degrees on its side.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have an input layer which is our context.
NOTE CONF
So here we just have a list of context words
x1 x2 until xk where c is the size of
NOTE CONF
the the context the number of context words.
And then we have our output word right.
NOTE CONF
So the word that we've left out here, this is
our output word right.
NOTE CONF
We take the words to the left and to the
right of the target.
NOTE CONF
And we predict the target.
And this is y here.
NOTE CONF
And then in between we just have a single hidden
layer.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't even use an activation function.
It's just a linear hidden layer.
NOTE CONF
Actually in this particular model.
This model is called word to vec.
NOTE CONF
And it was the first successful word embedding model came
out 20 2013 okay.
NOTE CONF
And then what is in between.
We have these weight matrix matrices here which connect the
NOTE CONF
input layer to the hidden layer.
And then we have another weight matrix W prime that
NOTE CONF
contains connects the hidden layer to the output layer.
And that is it.
NOTE CONF
Then we can just train this on tons of text.
Okay, so x is the context words.
NOTE CONF
Here h is the hidden layer, w and w prime
are the weights here and here that we're learning sees
NOTE CONF
the number of context words.
N is the size of the embedding.
NOTE CONF
So this is here the size of the hidden layer.
And v is the size of the vocabulary right.
NOTE CONF
So we have 10,000 words that we want to learn.
Then v would be 10,000 n here is typically much
NOTE CONF
smaller.
So in this paper n is 300.
NOTE CONF
So we will get vectors that are 300 dimensional right.
Because you're wondering so where is where's our word vector
NOTE CONF
in this?
The word vector is the activation here at the hidden
NOTE CONF
layer.
That's what we're interested in.
NOTE CONF
And so we set the hidden layer to a dimensionality
that's convenient for us.
NOTE CONF
In this paper as I said it's 300.
The the embeddings will be not sparse.
NOTE CONF
They will not have lots of zeros.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because it's much more compressed than the input.
The input can be, can have many thousands of dimensions
NOTE CONF
here.
There's a few other tricks.
NOTE CONF
So the weights are tight.
So the weight matrix here and here and here is
NOTE CONF
the same.
And the hidden layer activation is simply the the average
NOTE CONF
of the activations for each word.
So it's a very simple form of neural network.
NOTE CONF
And the authors on purpose have designed it like that.
So that training is is cheap.
NOTE CONF
Because if training is cheap then you can you can
throw lots of data at it.
NOTE CONF
And here they are training this on 1.6 billion words.
Okay, so use the context to predict the target word.
NOTE CONF
Only a single hidden layer weights are shared as I've
just said.
NOTE CONF
Context window.
They set to five, probably experimented a lot and this
NOTE CONF
was the what worked best towards to the left and
two words to the right.
NOTE CONF
Note that there is no representation of word order, right?
Because these matrices are the same for all the context
NOTE CONF
words.
It doesn't matter which order the context is in, right?
NOTE CONF
If the context is.
The dog.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Then the word that we need to guess here is
probably a verb, right?
NOTE CONF
Could be runs.
But because the position doesn't matter, the matrices are the
NOTE CONF
same.
If this was doc, then we would get exactly the
NOTE CONF
same result, right?
So the representation we're using here doesn't care about the
NOTE CONF
order of the words.
That's why this model is sometimes also called cbow which
NOTE CONF
means continuous bag of words.
There's another variant of this model which I'm not going
NOTE CONF
to talk about, but this one is called Bag of
Words model.
NOTE CONF
Okay, then I owe you one element of this model
without which it is not going to work.
NOTE CONF
So here I have just, you know, we have these
little dots here that are supposed to represent the words.
NOTE CONF
So what are these?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Obviously It's a neural network, so there have to be
numbers of some kind.
NOTE CONF
But how do I represent the input words?
The idea is very simple.
NOTE CONF
We just assume that we have a vector the size
of the vocabulary.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So let's assume here we have 10,000 words.
NOTE CONF
Then we have a vector of size 10,000, all of
which is zero except for a single one which represents
NOTE CONF
a given word.
So this is for example, if this is one then
NOTE CONF
this is dog.
If this is one then this is cat.
NOTE CONF
And so on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is called a one hot encoding.
Vector of all zeros except an index.
NOTE CONF
And the index tells you which word you're dealing with.
And of course with 10,000 a vector of length 10,000.
NOTE CONF
We can then represent 10,000 different words just by turning
on one of the one of the dimensions for this
NOTE CONF
word, and this is called the one hot encoding.
Here's another illustration.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We have a vector length v where v is the
NOTE CONF
size of the vocabulary.
And then if we turn on one then this indicates
NOTE CONF
Rome.
If we turn on the second one then indicates Paris
NOTE CONF
and so on.
So and you can easily imagine that we can.
NOTE CONF
If we make our vector sufficiently large, we can represent
all the words that we're interested in.
NOTE CONF
And this is called one hot encoding.
And this is how we get the words into our
NOTE CONF
model.
So here all the context words are one hot encoded
NOTE CONF
okay.
And then what it learns basically is it learns a
NOTE CONF
mapping here in the weights onto the hidden layer.
And the hidden layer is much smaller.
NOTE CONF
It's just a few hundred dimensions.
And the hidden layer is then our embedding.
NOTE CONF
Right.
The activation of the hidden layer.
NOTE CONF
So this is just another quick illustration.
Let's assume this cover is our target word.
NOTE CONF
So that would be why in the notation we've used
and semantics to the and meaning semantics to the meaning
NOTE CONF
RR for context words.
And how do you train the thing just back propagation.
NOTE CONF
Not even with um.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It has a hidden layer right.
So you need you need back propagation.
NOTE CONF
It's simple because there's no activation function.
And that also means it's very fast to train, but
NOTE CONF
it's trained like any other neural network.
And, uh, then the hidden layer h for word y
NOTE CONF
is the context vector vector.
And that's the word embedding.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have now much cleverer word embeddings that are
NOTE CONF
trained on lots of data and that are also much
more compressed because we can do this with just a
NOTE CONF
few hundred dimensions, right?
A hidden layer is, uh, is much shorter than the
NOTE CONF
input, right?
So the input here, these will have, let's say 10,000
NOTE CONF
dimensions.
So if I have for context words this would be
NOTE CONF
40,000 dimensions in total.
But here this compressed into 300 dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we get these uh embeddings which are quite different
NOTE CONF
from the counting in particular, much less sparse and much
more compact.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What can we do now.
NOTE CONF
So we have these embeddings.
And now we can do stuff like adding and subtracting
NOTE CONF
them.
To make computations with meanings.
NOTE CONF
We can compute distances to figure out whether two worlds
are similar.
NOTE CONF
We compute the distance between the vector.
So for example, if I take a word, let's call
NOTE CONF
it the question.
Then we can find an answer that's semantically or syntactically
NOTE CONF
related.
And we'll see examples in a moment.
NOTE CONF
And for that we just take the embedding for the
question and compare it to the embedding for the answers.
NOTE CONF
And then we just take the one that's most similar.
And here as I said they've trained this on 1.6
NOTE CONF
billion words.
They have a vocabulary that's larger than what I said.
NOTE CONF
It's a million words.
Actually it's not just 10,000.
NOTE CONF
And they've tested this on these question answer pairs.
And this is best illustrated with an example.
NOTE CONF
So we take a relationship for example a capital city.
And then we take the word embeddings for lots of
NOTE CONF
cities and the word embeddings for lots of countries.
And then if we want to figure out the capital
NOTE CONF
of sorry the country that Athens is the capital of.
Then we just look at all the countries and return
NOTE CONF
the one that's closest.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So we have our vector for Athens and we have
our vector for Greece.
NOTE CONF
So these are really close in terms of the cosine.
And then let's say this is the vector for Italy.
NOTE CONF
And this is much further away.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So Greece is the correct answer.
All right.
NOTE CONF
We can do all of this just by computing the
the similarity between pairs of vectors.
NOTE CONF
So Athens will return Greece.
Oslo would return Norway.
NOTE CONF
This works also for more exotic capitals.
Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan, Harare is the capital of
NOTE CONF
Zimbabwe.
It works for currencies.
NOTE CONF
Currency of Angola is the kwanza currency of Iran is
the real, and so on.
NOTE CONF
Cities in a state, in a US state.
Chicago is in Illinois, and so on.
NOTE CONF
Computing a man woman relationship.
So the female form of brothers.
NOTE CONF
Sister.
Female form of grants and his granddaughter.
NOTE CONF
But it also works for syntactic relationships.
So a parent apparently possibly, possibly, uh, is the opposite.
NOTE CONF
Uh, comparative?
Great.
NOTE CONF
Superlative, and so on.
Works for nationalities.
NOTE CONF
Swiss is the nationality for Switzerland, Cambodian is the nationality
for Cambodia, and so on.
NOTE CONF
So and this is not always correct.
I think they get about 60% correct on this test.
NOTE CONF
But all of this just by computing the vectors and
then doing cosine similarity between pairs of vectors.
NOTE CONF
55% of the semantic relations and 64% of the Syntactic
relations.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can do arithmetic as well.
NOTE CONF
So vectors of course you can add them and subtract
them.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we take the vector for what is this example
NOTE CONF
for Paris.
And we subtract the vector for France.
NOTE CONF
And by that I mean we take each dimension right.
And subtract that dimension.
NOTE CONF
So we do minus here on each dimension.
So we get another vector.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And now we add the vector for Italy.
NOTE CONF
And then we compute the nearest token the nearest word
in the vocabulary.
NOTE CONF
And this is Rome.
So Paris minus France plus Italy is Rome bigger minus
NOTE CONF
big plus cold is called sushi, minus Japan plus Germany
is bratwurst and so on.
NOTE CONF
The symbol for copper minus copper plus gold is the
symbol for gold, and so on.
NOTE CONF
This is also a fun one.
Windows minus, Microsoft Plus, Google is Android, and so on.
NOTE CONF
So this is of course a bit, you know, a
bit of a party trick, but it can do a
NOTE CONF
surprising number of relations like that just by doing arithmetic
on the vectors.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I think I'll stop here because we're out of
NOTE CONF
time.
I'll talk about this next time.
NOTE CONF
This is a cognitive application of these vectors.
But let's quickly summarise.
NOTE CONF
So we have seen an approach that can learn what
representations just from context just from seeing lots of text
NOTE CONF
or listening to lots of speech.
The simple approach is we just count which words co-occur
NOTE CONF
together in one big table, and this is sometimes called
latent semantic analysis.
NOTE CONF
or a more complicated approach, is that we use a
simple learning model, like a neural network to infer the
NOTE CONF
correct representations, and this has lots of strengths.
For example, it's really simple.
NOTE CONF
We just need a corpus, a set of text.
We don't need any annotation.
NOTE CONF
We don't need any additional assumptions.
It's of course language independent.
NOTE CONF
This will work for any language.
You have a set of text for cognitively plausible.
NOTE CONF
I've skipped over the example.
There's disadvantages.
NOTE CONF
It's often quite ad hoc, right?
There's lots of parameters like the dimensionality of your vectors,
NOTE CONF
like the size of your vocabulary and so on.
It cannot deal with ambiguity, right?
NOTE CONF
You only get a single vector, even if a word
can have multiple meaning.
NOTE CONF
And a lot of words can have multiple meanings.
And there's no representation representation of context, right here.
NOTE CONF
The order of the axes of the context words doesn't
matter.
NOTE CONF
So that means these two sentences would have the same
representation.
NOTE CONF
These two sentences would have the same representation, even though
the first one makes sense.
NOTE CONF
The other one doesn't make sense.
So that's a limitation.
NOTE CONF
And I'm out of time.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.